now let us turn to a
philosopher who flourished about 20
years after
uh heraclitus about 480 bc and who
represents the diametric opposite
viewpoint parmenides
p p-a-r-m-e-n-i-d-e-s
parmenides comes from the town of elia
elea and so his philosophy is frequently
referred to as
eliaticism or the eliatic philosophy
parmenides is the first and judging by
the fragments that we have to support
his convictions
with reasoned argument the first
we have a connected whole poem of his
extent
and he does not simply announce in
heraclitus's oracular fashion his
conclusions but lets us in on the actual
reasoning that he adopt
he is profoundly opposed to heraclitus's
view
the view that everything is an identity
of opposites or that nothing is
everything is becoming uh his entire
philosophy derives from one basic
principle which i will give you in my
own words but the substance of it is his
principle what
is is and what is not
is not and what is not can neither be
nor be thought about i repeat that
because that
is the essence of parmenides what
is is and what is not
is not and what is not can neither be
nor be thought about now if you want to
hear parmenide's
own formulations of this
i'll quote you on some of his fragments
quote from parmenides come now i will
tell thee and do thou hearken to my
saying and carry it away
the only two ways of search that can be
thought of
the first namely that what is is
and that it is impossible for it not to
be is the way of beliefs
for truth is its companion the other
namely that what is is not
that i tell thee is a path that none can
learn of at all
for thou canst not know what is not
that is impossible nor utter it
unquote now as you gather that is an
unmitigated repudiation of heraclitus
heraclitus says everything is and isn't
and parmesan says absolutely not
if it is it isn't if it isn't it isn't
what is is and what isn't
isn't in regard to the heretions he has
very pointed words he refers to them in
one fragment quote
as mortals knowing not who wander
two-faced
helplessness guides the wandering
thought in their breasts
and they are born along stupefied like
men deaf and blind
undiscerning crowds who hold that it is
and is not
uh the same and not the same and that
all things travel in opposite directions
unquote in other words out with the
heraclitus
and one more fragment from him for this
shall never be proved
that the things that are not are and do
thou restrain thy thought from this way
of inquiry now what does it mean his
basic principle
well it is of course the earliest
formulation in the history of thought
of what iron random gold speech
formulates as
existence exists and its meaning is the
same
it therefore includes the following
elements first
there is a reality which he refers to as
what is that which exists reality exists
and only reality exists
what is is and only what is is
what is not is not
and another point implicit what is not
can never be thought about in other
words
all thought must be thought about
existence
about what is it is impossible according
to parmenides ever
to think about what is not
or to know what is not or to have any
cognitive relation of any kind to
what is not now if you doubt this
perform a mental experiment right now
try
i want you for a second to think about
nothing now i don't mean the letters
n-o-t-h because that's something
and i don't mean a black wall that's
something i mean
nothing absolutely nothing what is not
okay go ahead and have a thought
now you say you cannot do it because as
soon as you think you think about
something you think about what is and
thus
paramedic is famous line thou canst not
know nor and
what is not is simply
empty there is no what is not and
therefore you can't think about it
and this of course is the view that
ultimately appears in
galt speech as the in the developed full
developed philosophy is the view that
consciousness is the faculty of
perceiving that which exists
in this sense the earliest source of
these crucial ideas
are permanent and he is therefore an
extremely important
and in this respect an extremely good
philosophy
we can put his viewpoint another way in
order to prepare ourselves for the
conclusions
the consequences that he derived from
if thought is always about reality
always about what is
then it is untenable and invalid ever to
hold a concept of sheer non-existence
in other words of what is not because
that would be a concept of nothing
in other words it would be no concept
his key point in this respect is
to put it in a sort of funny way but
this is really the essence of it
there is no nothing there is only some
things
and the thought about nothing is
therefore not a thought about anything
it's not a thought
at all all concepts must be formed
within existence
and referred to existence and therefore
any theory or any philosophic position
which at any point
requires a concept of sheer nothing
of non-existence according to parmenides
is
invalid on that grounds and must be
dismissed right away
now on this basis parmenides drew a
number of systematic deductions
here they are number one
the universe must be uncreated
could never have come into existence why
well if there was an origin a beginning
to what is then what existed before
well if it wasn't what is it had to be
what is not
but what is not is not there is no
nothing
and therefore there could never have
been a state of nothing preceding
the state of something in other words
the universe must always have existed
it could not have been created so much
for the religious view
now i may say that on the basis of this
reasoning no greek philosopher ever
believed the universe was created out of
nothing
that is a distinctively and exclusively
jewish christian
doctrine never accepted by the most
mystical greeks
on the basis of parmenides principle
secondly in the other direction the
universe must be indestructible
it could never go out of existence
because if it went out of existence
meaning by the universe of course
everything which is
what would be left what is not
but what is not is not and can never be
and therefore the universe must be
indestructible it always will exist now
if you put these two points together
we can say that according to parmenides
the universe is therefore eternal
has no beginning and knowing
third point focusing now
within the universe
can there be such a thing as a vacuum
as an empty space completely empty now
a real little zero inside
the physical world to which parmenides
answers
absolutely not what is not is not
all there is is what is and therefore
there's no such thing
as a real vacuum as this was later came
to be expressed in latin the universe is
a plain
p-l-e-n-u-m which means it is
solidly packed the actual word means
full it's completely full
there's no little holes no little spaces
no little nothings
it's one big slab of stuff
huge ball of tightly packed matter now
for other reasons which are irrelevant
he happened to believe that it had the
shape of a sphere
apparently because he thought there was
no good reason why it should bulge in
one direction and not the other
ah but that's beside the point
well uh so far we've
given you several of his deductions
his principle what is his is really the
basic law of logic and in that sense
he's sometimes called the father of
logic
although that's pretty indirect because
he didn't know that it had anything to
do with thinking
as a principle of guiding thinking he
certainly launched an all-out attack on
heraclitus and raised hell with religion
so he's made a good start
but permanentes drew another deduction
from his basic principle which in his
opinion was just as obvious as all the
preceding ones
and that's where all the trouble comes
in
he drew as a fourth conclusion
the idea that change is
impossible change of any kind
motion alteration occurrence of any kind
therefore according to his viewpoint
there is no such thing as talking
moving writing swimming planets orbiting
the sun
all of that is a gigantic illusion
now why how did he draw such a
conclusion
well take a simple example of change and
to vary it i won't make it to match
let's take a seed growing into a flower
now at the beginning of the change at
the beginning
the seed represents what is
what about the flower at the beginning
flower is not at the end of the change
what happened to the seed
it's gone it's what is not what happened
to the flower well of course it's now
there
it's what is and that of course is true
in every
change something goes away and something
comes
to be what does it mean then
change is a double violation he
concluded of his principle
every change is a simultaneous passage
from what is to what is not
and from the other aspect from what is
not to what is
but there is no what is not and you
can't think about what is not
and therefore out
change according to him is just as
irrational as the idea of the universe
being created or going out of existence
it involves reference to what is not and
what is not
is not therefore he concluded
there is no change at all
the world is completely motionless in
every respect
now you see here that there is a sense
in which he is in complete agreement
with heroclix
both of them agree with the following
crucial viewpoint
change implies a contradiction
change implies a violation of logic
heraclitus from the aspect that at the
end of the change the thing isn't isn't
what it was
and permanent is from the aspect that at
the end of the change you have what
is not becoming what is and vice versa
and that's
a contradiction since what is not is not
now given this common premise they of
course take diametrically opposite views
a heraclitus says change is obvious
therefore to hell with logic parmenity
says
logic is obvious therefore to hell with
change
but the common denominator is you have
to make your
choice it's either logic or change
either identity
or change now just to make it a little
worse
the two things i said that the greeks
were primarily concerned with at this
early stage was change and multiplicity
well having denied change hermeneutics
went on with apparently equal
consistency to deny multiplicity
there is no multiplicity there are no
variety of things
why well he like everybody at this early
period
was a monist and remember monis means
somebody who believes there's only one
stuff which makes up the world
but in addition he believes that the
world is a planum
solidly packed there are no spaces
well then he asked what in the world
would make one thing different from
anything else
how would you draw a line and say here's
one thing and here's another
the world is one solid undifferentiated
slab
of one stuff which has no spaces between
it so there's nothing to separate one
thing from another thing
we have to therefore say that
multiplicity is an
illusion the world is just a hunk of
undifferentiated stuff
there's nothing to distinguish one part
from the other again
there are no entities or putting in
another way there's just one entity
everything which he called the one
and you can see why see it's no longer
the one in the many because the many are
gone no
it's just the one now that uh believe it
or not is the ancestor of the christian
god
by several transmutations and
permutations parmenides one became the
god of christianity but it took quite a
while
for it to happen so the world is simply
a motionless
changeless undifferentiated ball of
tightly packed matter
now needless to say this is not the way
it appears to our senses
it appears as though there is
multiplicity it appears as though
there's
change what is parmenide's answer
same as hercules senses are deceptive
they give us only the world of
appearances
which is not true reality true reality
is the motionless one
and it is arrived at by logic not by the
senses
by reason as he interpreted reason
and therefore again we have rationalism
epistemologically
harmonies like heraclitus only coming to
the opposite conclusion
what is wrong with his reasoning again
i'll wait till aristotle because one of
aristotle's main assignments in
metaphysic was to answer heraclitus and
answer parmenides
and to do so aristotle carved out
certain concepts
which he originated which had never
existed before
and which we used to this day
and he said those were the only concepts
by reference to which we could answer
heracles uh harmonies
so we'll see when we get to aristotle
now you see that people are in a very
dreadful position philosophically now
we have a catastrophe almost at the very
outset of western philosophy
one philosopher with an array of
arguments that seemed persuasive
at the time to prove that everything has
changed and there are no things
another philosopher with an array of
arguments which seem
convincing to prove that nothing changes
and there's only the motionless one
what are we going to do to reconcile
these two philosophers to
take their arguments and somehow make
sense of it all that was the task
of subsequent philosophy never properly
answered till the time of aristotle
now we haven't finished with parmenides
though because he had a famous follower
namely zeno z-e-n-o
and he lived around between 490 and 430
bc
and he is famous for devising a series
of paradoxes
which purport to prove two things
some of them purport to prove that
motion is impossible
thus carrying out parmenides principle
and some of them purport to prove uh one
in particular that multiplicity is
impossible
now i'm going to give you one of each uh
they all involve the same kind of
reasoning
only sometimes it's more obvious and
sometimes not and again i'm not going to
answer them tonight because aristotle
devoted his
attention to answering them and in the
process said some very valuable things
about the nature of infinity
i'll just present to you two of xeno's
paradoxes
and you can get an idea what a dreadful
position people were in at the time
because they couldn't answer xeno and
they knew something had to be wrong
well his most simple one about motion is
that it's impossible to cross a room
why is it impossible to cross a room
well consider across a room you first of
all have to cross half of it
but to cross half of it first of all i
have to cross half of that
quarter in other words and to cross that
you first of all have to cross half of
it and eight
and of course 1st to 16th and so on now
he asks
how many times can alien distance be
subdivided and his answer was there's no
end
if you say one zillionth of the distance
well there's always one half's in of the
distance
you can divide without n in other words
you can subdivide
infinitely but how can you possibly
cross
an infinite number of distances no
matter how tiny tiny they are
because to cross any distance would take
some time
no matter how little and across an
infinite number of distances would take
an infinite amount of time but you die
in 40 or 50 or 60 years
and therefore you obviously couldn't
cross a room
or any distance for that matter and
therefore motion is an illusion
now this would apply to the motion of
his tongue
uttering the argument his tongue to get
from the upper palate to the lower has
to cross half the distance and so on
but uh that's his viewpoint
there are other trickier ones but they
all involve the same idea
you see what you can do with that for
the next three or four weeks
now one of his paradoxes on multiplicity
multiplicity is the view that the world
consists of a number of things
for instance you and you and you
and this or you can take it on the level
of atoms if you want
or on the level of galaxies doesn't make
any difference to the argument
now zeno uh is going to argue that this
is impulsive
the world in other words cannot be a
hole compiled
composed of parts it has to be one
indivisible slab
not a hole comprised of parts now why
well he says
i'll show you that the idea that the
universe has parts
is filled with impossible contradictions
well for instance let's imagine the
universe is a whole
which has many parts and let us ask what
would the size of the universe be
how many parts does the world have he
says according to the people who believe
in such a
thing as parts well
if we keep on subdividing how many parts
will the world
end up having well he says obviously
it'll end up with an infinite number of
parts because
every magnitude is theoretically
divisible without limit
so if we break the world up into one
foot long things we can break each of
those up into two six inch things in
each of those into four threes
and those into four three inch things
and so on and so on there's no
theoretical end
so if we keep going you have to grant
that there is an infinite number of
parts and if there's an infinite number
of parts no matter how small
each of them is we must have an
infinitely big universe
because infinity times any amount is
infinitely big
thus we reached the conclusion that
if the universe consists of parts it
must be infinitely large
but now look at it another way
what will be the size of the ultimate
parts
the ultimate constituents when we
finally reach them
now he says there has to be such
ultimate indivisible parts
otherwise we can't talk meaningfully
about the world being a whole
consisting of parts if you're going to
say a hole there has to be parts
and that means there ultimately has to
be something which is no longer
divisible
but now any magnitude as we've seen
is divisible so what must be the size of
the ultimate parts if they're to be even
in theory
indivisible they must be zero in size
the ultimate particles or constituents
in the world
must have no magnitude but if a
universe's
has parts which have no size
what will be the size of the whole
obviously it won't have any size an
infinite number of zeros is still zero
so if there is multiplicity
on the one hand we must have an
infinitely big universe which has
endless parts
and on the other hand an infinitely
small universe which has
sizeless parts and that's an impossible
contradiction
and therefore the premise must be wrong
there is no multiplicity
therefore parmenides was right after all
there's only the one
the universe is in principle indivisible
that's the end
now until we get to aristotle's answer
to this and this as you see
involves the same kind of issues
pertaining to infinity and infinite
subdivision
that the other paradox did in all of his
do and you need a certain theory of the
nature of infinity to answer
but until we get there if you don't know
it's okay to go home
you can assume pragmatically that you
are one part
and your home is another and motion
between the two as possible
and how we validate that philosophically
we'll discuss in several weeks
is there any such thing as a vacuum or
is the universe completely filled with
matter of some sort
i agree with parmenides i believe his
argument on this point is unanswerable
that there is no nothing and
consequently no such thing as a true
vacuum in other words a true
zero inhabiting near reality anywhere
this does not mean however that
everything
is necessarily solely packed with matter
in the form that we now
know it simply that it must be packed
with
something now what it is that it's
filled with
i do not purport to know there used to
be theories
in the 19th century that the world's
empty places so-called were filled with
ether
and that the universe was solidly filled
and that ether was the medium
by means of which energy traveled action
at a distance was able to take place and
so on
i believe ultimately some form of that
theory
some form will have to be sustained
on philosophical grounds but again
referring to the distinction between
philosophy and science i wouldn't dream
of speculating
uh what is it that is present in what we
regard as a vacuum after all we do not
know
everything about the physical universe
and the fact that we are able to pump
out
or discover areas with the absence of
most matter that we now can identify
does not per se prove the existence
of a vacuum a long time ago
some of us used to use the term
humorously i may say
little stuff a little stuff was the name
we gave to that which is where nothing
isn't
but what it is we do not purport to know
what i say just to repeat that one of
the problems of the early philosophers
was their failure to differentiate
various kinds of change
well certainly they didn't differentiate
and certainly it was a major step
forward when plato and aristotle began
to classify and say there's
change of place locomotion and
change of substance when a thing comes
into existence as the flower
versus the seed and change of quantity
when a thing gets bigger
and change of quality you know and so on
and when the time you get to aristotle
you have a sophisticated view of all the
types of change
you find that many of the problems that
they got into disappear because they
were confusing one type of change with
another
in that sense yes that was a problem but
i would never want to say
anything that would imply they should
have done differently or that that is a
criticism
of them because after all this is the
kindergarten of mankind and they are
regardless of their errors the heroes
who made the first steps
so i mean surely if they had known what
came centuries later they would have
been better
but on the other hand if they hadn't
done what they did the later centuries
couldn't have developed
so i'm always when someone in the 20th
century says everything flows and
nothing abides
i have a completely different attitude
than i do toward heraclituses
how could parmenides think of a shape
for the universe
what would be outside that shape
wouldn't the universe have to be
infinite without shape
no it would not i agree with parmenides
on that point
if you ask tim not necessarily with the
idea of it being a sphere i don't
pretend to know what shape the universe
has
but i agree with parmenides and so did
aristotle and so on his own way to
einstein if you want
we give you this modern scientific
authority that the universe is finite
and has some structure
and some kind of shape and that does not
imply
any uh um outside of the universe the
simple
question to what is outside the universe
is there is no
outside the universe outside the
universe
is a meaningless phrase it does not
designate a locality which is empty
it designates no locality there is no
such place as
outside the universe all that exists is
the universe
now when asking that question you
necessarily have to project yourself as
being outside the universe and you're
looking at it from the outside and you
see this big ball and
there's all the space outside but you
can't project yourself outside the
universe
you can only project yourself within the
universe and therefore from that
perspective there is no difficulty in
thinking of the universe is finite
limited shaped but you cannot visualize
its shape because to do so you'd have to
stand outside
the best i can recommend to you as a
mental exercise is imagine a little dot
in your mind and let it fill up from the
inside out until it occupies your entire
mental screen and do not try to peep
beyond it
and then you've got the universe when i
say that which is not is not is that a
principle about nothing
no it's a principle denying nothing
it's a principle saying you cannot have
principles about nothing because there
is no nothing
so it is not about nothing it is
indirectly about something it tells you
one thing about something
namely something is all there is